Chapter 6 analysis section reorg (#376)
worldbank/d4di: chapters/data-analysis.tex

Of course, there is plenty of complexity behind it:
the econometrics, the theory of change, the measurement methods, and so much more.
However, none of those are the subject of this book,
and most statistical software packages complex functions into simple expressions.
This chapter will focus on how to organize your data work so that coding the analysis is simple.
Most of a research assistant's time is spent cleaning data and getting it into the right format.
When the practices recommended here are adopted,
analyzing the data is as simple as using a command that is already implemented in a statistical software.

\end{fullwidth}

%------------------------------------------------

\section{Managing data effectively}

The goal of data management is to organize the components of data work
so the complete process can traced, understood, and revised without massive effort.
In our experience, there are four key elements to good data management:
folder structure, task breakdown, master scripts, and version control.
A good folder structure organizes files so that any material can be found when needed.
It reflects a task breakdown into steps with well-defined inputs, tasks, and outputs.

> This breakdown is applied to code, data sets, and outputs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This breakdown is applied to code, data sets, and research results.
```

Output is the best word here, but it is used in the sentence immediately before, and is used in a more general meaning the first time. Can this be improved somehow?

Author: "It reflects a breakdown of the data work process into steps with well-defined inputs, tasks, and outputs."?
And then I think we can take the line you changed out. It doesn't really add much at this point.

Reviewer: Changed here: 262585957f223ee49d6e72565f8f859bd59316b6

They briefly describe what each code does,
and map the files they require and create.
They also connect code and folder structure through macros or objects.
In short, a master script is a human-readable map of the tasks,
files, and folder structure that comprise a project.
Having a master script eliminates the need for complex instructions to replicate results.
Reading it should be enough for anyone unfamiliar with the project
to understand what are the main tasks, which scripts execute them,
and where different files can be found in the project folder.
That is, it should contain all the information needed to interact with a project's data work.

\subsection{Implementing version control}

Establishing a version control system is an incredibly useful
and important step for documentation, collaboration and conflict-solving.
Version control allows you to effectively track code edits,
including the addition and deletion of files.
This way you can delete code you no longer need,
and still recover it easily if you ever need to get back previous work.
Everything that can be version-controlled should be.
Both analysis results and data sets will change with the code.

> Whenever possible, you should track have each of them with the code that created it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whenever possible, you should track each of them with the code that created it.
```

Reviewer: Extra word that should be removed, but even after removing the word, I do not know what we want to say in this sentence.

Author: What I wanted to say it that ideally, when you make changes to a particular script, you then run all the other scripts linked to it from the master, and the commit includes not only changes to the code, but also to the outputs and datasets it may create. But I see your point that this is not super clear. Does my explanation make sense to you?

Reviewer: done in 28cc3f469ffc3ad1c2e7d38e9f08c88185970dc7

If you are writing code in Git or GitHub,
you can output plain text files such as \texttt{.tex} tables
and metadata saved in \texttt{.txt} or \texttt{.csv} to that directory.
Binary files that compile the tables,
as well as the complete data sets, on the other hand,
should be stored in your team's shared folder.
Whenever data cleaning or data construction codes are edited,
use the master script to run all the code for your project.
Git will highlight the changes that were in data sets and results that they entail.

%------------------------------------------------

\section{De-identifying research data}

The starting point for all tasks described in this chapter is the raw data.
It should contain only materials that are received directly from the field.

> They will invariably come in a host of file formats and nearly always contain personally-identifying information.\index{personally-identifying information}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Raw data will invariably come in a host of file formats and nearly always contain personally-identifying information, meaning that it will have to stay encrypted as described in the previous chapter.\index{personally-identifying information}
```

I found it weird this sentence starts with they, but if that is just me then no problem. I think we should make _one_ reference to safe storage of the raw data in the beginning of each section that describe safe practices for raw data

and important step for documentation, collaboration and conflict-solving.
Version control allows you to effectively track code edits,
including the addition and deletion of files.
This way you can delete code you no longer need,
and still recover it easily if you ever need to get back previous work.
Everything that can be version-controlled should be.
Both analysis results and data sets will change with the code.
Whenever possible, you should track have each of them with the code that created it.
If you are writing code in Git or GitHub,
you can output plain text files such as \texttt{.tex} tables
and metadata saved in \texttt{.txt} or \texttt{.csv} to that directory.
Binary files that compile the tables,
as well as the complete data sets, on the other hand,
should be stored in your team's shared folder.
Whenever data cleaning or data construction codes are edited,
use the master script to run all the code for your project.
Git will highlight the changes that were in data sets and results that they entail.

%------------------------------------------------

\section{De-identifying research data}

The starting point for all tasks described in this chapter is the raw data

> which should contain only materials that are received directly from the field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which should contain only information that are received directly from the field.
```

We never use materials in this context anywhere else? is there a good reason for that?

> The raw data will invariably come in a host of file formats and these files

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The raw data will invariably come in a variety of file formats and these files
```
Unnecessarily unusual word choice

> should be retained in the raw data folder \textit{exactly as they were 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
should be saved in the raw data folder \textit{exactly as they were 
```
Unnecessarily unusual word choice. "kept" is a more exact synonym of "retained", but I think "saved" is better here

As described in the previous chapter, confidential data must always be
encrypted\sidenote{\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/wiki/Encryption}} and be
properly backed up since every other data file you will use is created from the
raw data. The only data sets that can not be re-created are the raw data 
themselves.

The raw data files should never be edited directly. This is true even in the
rare case when the raw data cannot be opened due to, for example, incorrect
encoding where non-English character is causing rows or columns to break at the
wrong place when the data is imported. In this scenario, you should create a
copy of the raw data where you manually remove the special characters and
securely back up \textit{both} the broken and the fixed copy of the raw data.
You will only keep working from the fixed copy, but you keep both copies in
case you later realize that the manual fix was done incorrectly.

Loading encrypted data frequently can be disruptive to the workflow.
To facilitate the handling of the data, remove any personally identifiable information from the data set.
This will create a de-identified data set, that can be saved in a non-encrypted folder.

> De-identification,\sidenote{\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/wiki/De-identification}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
De-identification\sidenote{\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/wiki/De-identification}},
```
the side note explains the term so set the number directly to the word

Reviewer 2: This is a general formatting question. There are many places where this is inconsistently done. I personally think the note numbering in the text should come _after_ sentence stops, commas, and colons; and _before_ parentheses or quotation marks.

Author: I agree!

Reviewer: I think it should come after if it references the clause, but immediately on the word if it reference a word or a terminology. This case is weird as it is a one word clause, but I think it this case is the second case. But I seem to be outvoted here, which is fine.

at this stage, means stripping the data set of direct identifiers.\sidenote{\url{ https://www.povertyactionlab.org/sites/default/files/resources/J-PAL-guide-to-deidentifying-data.pdf}}
To be able to do so, you will need to go through your data set and
find all the variables that contain identifying information.
Flagging all potentially identifying variables in the questionnaire design stage
simplifies the initial de-identification process.

> If you haven't done that, that are a few tools that can help you with it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you did not do that or you received the raw data from someone else, that are a few tools that can help you with it.
```

	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/wiki/Iecodebook}}

Once you have a list of variables that contain PII,
assess them against the analysis plan and ask:
will this variable be needed for analysis?
If not, the variable should be dropped.
Don't be afraid to drop too many variables the first time,
as you can always go back and remove variables from the list of variables to be dropped,
but you can not go back in time and drop a PII variable that was leaked
because it was incorrectly kept.
Examples include respondent names, enumerator names, interview date, respondent phone number.
If the variable is needed for analysis, ask:
can I encode or otherwise construct a variable to use for the analysis that masks the PII,
and drop the original variable?
This is typically the case for most identifying information.
Examples include geocoordinates
(after constructing measures of distance or area,
drop the specific location),
and names for social network analysis (can be encoded to secret and unique IDs).
If PII variables are strictly required for the analysis itself,
it will be necessary to keep at least a subset of the data encrypted through the data analysis process.

> If the answer is yes to either of these questions,

Reviewer: It is not clear what "these questions" mean. All of the above, the ones immediately above. I think this could be done better, but not sure what to suggest as I am not 100% sure what we mean.

Author: There are only two questions in the whole chapter, and they are in the same paragraph as this "these questions".  I guess we can say "to either of the two previous questions"?

Reviewer: Ok, I think one reason for my confusion was that one sentence separated the line with `these questions` and the actual questions. I moved that sentence to the end of the paragraph, italicized the actual questions, and made some other small changes here: f7e572ac3894a89eec2eef340868a33919c422e0

If you are fine with this, please just resolve this issue.

Author: that's great. Thanks, Kris!

all you need to do is write a script to drop the variables that are not required for analysis,
encode or otherwise mask those that are required,
and save a working version of the data.

The resulting de-identified data will be the underlying source for all cleaned and constructed data.
This is the data set that you will interact with directly during the remaining tasks described in this chapter.

> Because identifying information is typically only used during data collection,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because identifying information is typically only used during data collection
```

I think this sentence reads better without that comma

Author: I think I'd leave the comma and change the following line:

"Because identifying information is typically only used during data collection,
when teams need to find and confirm the identity of interviewees,"

Reviewer: That is better. Previously it was unclear that the mid-clause was a continuation of the first clause and not a clause by its own, but the word _when_ makes that clearer

Author: addressed in c9c9a08

%------------------------------------------------

\begin{fullwidth}
Transforming raw data into a substantial contribution to scientific knowledge
requires a mix of subject expertise, programming skills,
and statistical and econometric knowledge.
The process of data analysis is, therefore,
a back-and-forth discussion between people
with differing skill sets.
The research assistant usually ends up being the pivot of this discussion.
It is their job to translate the data received from the field into
economically meaningful indicators and to analyze them
while making sure that code and outputs do not become too difficult to follow or get lost over time.
This can be a complex process.

When it comes to code, though, analysis is substantially less intricate than data cleaning,

> as long as you have already organized your data well.

Reviewer: I am not sure if this is the best way to put this. But since this will conflict with #375 I think there will just create more mess to try to edit this here.

including the addition and deletion of files.
This way you can delete code you no longer need,
and still recover it easily if you ever need to get back previous work.

> The focus in version control is often code, but changes to analysis output should, when possible, be version controlled together with the edit to the code that caused the change.

Author: ```suggestion
The focus in version control is often code, but changes to analysis outputs should, when possible, be version controlled together with the code edits that caused the changes.
```

> This way you know what edit in the code led to what edit in the analysis.

Author: ```suggestion
This way you know which edits in the code led to which changes in the outputs.
```
